Title: BXRL: Behavior-Explainable Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.23738v1

Published Time: Thu, 26 Mar 2026 00:16:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# BXRL: Behavior-Explainable Reinforcement Learning 

## Ram Rachum 1,2 , Yotam Amitai 3, Yonatan Nakar 4, Reuth Mirsky 2, †, Cameron Allen 1, †

ram.rachum@berkeley.edu, yotamitai@gmail.com, yonatannakar@google.com, reuth.mirsky@tufts.edu, camallen@berkeley.edu 

> 1

University of California, Berkeley 

> 2

Tufts University 

> 3

Independent Researcher 

> 4

Google Research  

> †

Equal senior contribution 

## Abstract 

A major challenge of Reinforcement Learning is that agents often learn undesired be-haviors that seem to defy the reward structure they were given. Explainable Reinforce-ment Learning (XRL) methods can answer queries such as “explain this specific action”, “explain this specific trajectory”, and “explain the entire policy”. However, XRL lacks a formal definition for behavior as a pattern of actions across many episodes. We provide such a definition, and use it to enable a new query: “Explain this behavior” .We present Behavior-Explainable Reinforcement Learning (BXRL) , a new prob-lem formulation that treats behaviors as first-class objects. BXRL defines a behavior measure as any function m : Π → R, allowing users to precisely express the pattern of actions that they find interesting and measure how strongly the policy exhibits it. We de-fine contrastive behaviors that reduce the question “why does the agent prefer a to a′?” to “why is m(π) high?” which can be explored with differentiation. We do not imple-ment an explainability method; we instead analyze three existing methods and propose how they could be adapted to explain behavior. We present a port of the HighwayEnv driving environment to JAX, which provides an interface for defining, measuring, and differentiating behaviors with respect to the model parameters. 

## 1 Introduction 

A chatbot optimized with human feedback declares love to a journalist and expresses a desire to spread misinformation (Roose, 2023). An Autonomous Driving (AD) system powering a fleet of robotaxis learns to brake unnecessarily hard near bicyclists, increasing the risk of rear-end collisions (NHTSA, 2025). A swarm of warehouse robots navigates a grid to pick groceries, but three of its members collide into each other, causing a massive fire (BBC News, 2021). We want to understand why these failures happen. Do the agents not receive enough information about their environment? Are the failures a result of out-of-distribution generalization? Or are the agents’ actions an inevitable consequence of the incentive structure we provided (Knox et al., 2023)? We advocate for explaining the recurring patterns of undesirable behavior that lead to failures, rather than the failures themselves. In our last example, the warehouse robots were observed to “play chicken”, approaching each other at high speed and diverting at the last moment (Prisco, 2021). In 1

> arXiv:2603.23738v1 [cs.LG] 24 Mar 2026

other domains, behaviors will be described not in terms of velocity and acceleration, but of defection rate, portfolio concentration, word choice, and more. Given unwanted agent behavior of any kind, we wish to define it, measure it, and find an explanation for it. 

This need is within the scope of Explainable Reinforcement Learning (XRL), which is a subdomain at the intersection of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) and Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Heuillet et al., 2021). XRL aims to make the decisions of RL agents more interpretable and un-derstandable to humans (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017). It is driven by the needs to diagnose failures (Amodei et al., 2016), maintain user trust (Ribeiro et al., 2016), satisfy regulations (Goodman & Flaxman, 2017), and ensure alignment with societal goals (Arrieta et al., 2020). Freiesleben & König (2023) warn about a pervasive problem in XAI: explanation methods are rou-tinely proposed without clearly defining what it is they aim to explain. This makes it difficult to invoke multiple explanation methods on the same phenomenon for a comparative study. This prob-lem also exists in XRL, specifically for explanations of behavior, as distinct from actions or policies. When XRL papers use the term “behavior”, they offer no formal definition for it, or any way to pinpoint one behavior out of many. Some papers use the word “behavior” as a synonym for policy. Atrey et al. (2020) provide a verbal definition: “behavior, or aggregate actions, over temporally extended sequences of frames” . However, a quantitative definition is needed to (1) measure how strongly a given policy exhibits a given behavior and (2) allow the user to point at a specific behav-ior and ask “why is the agent behaving like this ?” This gap in problem formulation extends beyond method papers; no survey paper or position paper poses the problem of explaining behavior, nor provides a definition for behavior. We address this gap in this paper. We find a simple and general definition for behavior in an adjacent research area and repurpose it for explainability. We use it to make the following contributions: 1. We formalize the notion of behavior in RL as any scalar function m : Π → R and introduce 

Behavior-Explainable Reinforcement Learning (BXRL) , a problem formulation that treats behaviors as first-class explanation targets. We show how to articulate specific behaviors as measurable quantities that, when differentiable, enable gradient-based analysis. (Sec. 3–5). 2. We analyze three existing methods—data attribution, SVERL-P, and COUNTERPOL—and show how each can be adapted to analyze behavior measures with minimal structural changes (Sec. 7). 3. To further facilitate BXRL research, we introduce HighJax , a port of the HighwayEnv driving environment to JAX. HighJax provides an interface for defining, measuring, and differentiating behaviors with respect to the model parameters. We use HighJax to define an example behavior that leads to vehicle collisions, and invite researchers to use this environment to conduct BXRL research. (Sec. 8). 

## 2 Background 

Explanation target and source Hempel (1965) draws the distinction between the explanandum 

(the phenomenon to be explained) and the explanans (the information that does the explaining). We use the terms explanation target and explanation source . The former is the problem domain and the latter is the solution domain. Keeping with Freiesleben & König (2023), we practice great care in keeping them separate. 

Contrastive explanation While philosophers have long debated what constitutes an explanation (Hume, 1758; Lewis, 1973; Woodward, 2003), research in cognitive science and social psychology has highlighted a key finding: good explanations are contrastive (Lipton, 1990; Miller, 2019). Peo-ple do not ask “Why P ?” in isolation; they ask “Why P rather than Q?” even when Q is implicit. P

and Q are respectively called fact and foil . For example, if a person asks “why did my barn catch on fire?” we recognize that the answer “because it had oxygen in it”, while correct, has no explanatory power. The implicit “...rather than Q?” is “...while other buildings in the area did not catch on fire?” The answer to a contrastive question follows Lipton’s Difference Condition : to explain why P rather 2than Q, cite a cause C that is present in P ’s causal history but absent from Q’s. In our example, 

C might be “because someone threw a lit cigarette in a pile of hay”. Crucially, the foil determines which causes are explanatory: the same fact P has different explanations depending on which foil 

Q the questioner has in mind. 

Behavior as disposition We ground our usage of the term “behavior” in Ryle (1949)’s disposi-tional analysis. Ryle described behaviors as tendencies to take certain actions in certain situations: “to be a smoker is just to be bound or likely to fill, light and draw on a pipe in such and such condi-tions”. He distinguished single-track dispositions from multi-track dispositions, where multi-track dispositions could manifest as several different types of actions. This dispositional view is echoed in the psychological habit literature, where habits are characterized by “activation by recurring context cues” (Wood & Rünger, 2016). 

Markov Decision Process (MDP) An MDP is defined by (S, A, T, R, γ ): states S, actions A,transition function T (s′|s, a ), reward function R(s, a ), and discount factor γ. At each timestep 

t, the agent observes state st ∈ S , selects action at ∼ πθ (a | st) according to its policy πθ :

S × A → [0 , 1] , a conditional distribution over actions given states, parameterized by θ, receives reward rt, and the environment transitions to a new state. A trajectory τ = ( s0, a 0, r 0, s 1, . . . )

is a sequence of experiences; an epoch is a batch of N timesteps collected for a single gradient update. The return Gt = P∞ 

> k=0

γkrt+k is the discounted sum of future rewards. The agent’s goal is to maximize expected return, or value V (s) = E[Gt|st = s]. The advantage At = Gt − V (st)

measures how much better an action was than expected. The training objective J(π) = E[G0] is the expected return under π. The Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence DKL (πold ∥πnew ) = Eπold [log πold  

> πnew

]

is commonly used to constrain policy updates so that each gradient step does not change the policy too drastically (Kullback & Leibler, 1951). We note that BXRL applies to Partially-Observable MDPs as well, where ot, the observation the agent receives at timestep t, is distinct from st; in a fully-observable MDP, ot = st.

Attribution and importance methods Several methods attribute a scalar objective to individual components of the learning process. Data attribution (Hu et al., 2025) adapts TracIn (Pruthi et al., 2020) to identify which training records most influenced a target function, measuring influence via the gradient inner product between the target and the PPO loss (Schulman et al., 2017). SVERL-P (Beechey et al., 2023) considers Shapley values over state features, quantifying each feature’s contribution to agent performance. COUNTERPOL (Deshmukh et al., 2023) finds the minimal policy change that achieves a specified target return, optimizing a counterfactual objective with a KL-divergence proximity constraint. All three are built around a modular scalar objective that can be retargeted at behavior measures. 

## 3 Properties of Behavior 

We distill the single-track model of behavior presented by Ryle (1949) to concrete MDP properties: 

Property 1 (Action-based) . Behavior consists of one or more actions the agent tends to choose. 

Property 2 (Recurring) . Behavior recurs in multiple episodes. 

Property 3 (Graded) . A behavior is not merely present or absent; a policy may exhibit a be-havior strongly, weakly, or anywhere in between. 

Property 4 (Scoped) . Any given behavior will be limited in scope in some way: it may be scoped to a specific set of states, or to specific dimensions of the action space if it is multi-dimensional. Timesteps in states outside this scope are irrelevant to the behavior, as are action dimensions outside it. 

3We previously used the motivating example of a warehouse robot that plays chicken, i.e., moves too fast toward human workers. This phenomenon satisfies all four properties: (1) it’s expressed by the action of speeding up, (2) it happens in separate incidents, (3) it can happen less often or more often, with varying speeds, and (4) it may only occur in states in which the robot is moving toward humans, and only actions related to full-body movement are relevant to it. In the next section we map out the XRL landscape and find a gap in its treatment of behavior. 

## 4 Related Work 

We are interested in the subset of XRL literature that is guided by a strong motivation to answer a focused question, giving preference to “why?” questions. We deem as out of scope any XRL paradigm whose primary goal is to build trust, verify safety properties, or summarize policies. We organize the remaining methods by what kind of question they answer, i.e., their explanation target .1

We choose three surveys that provide a taxonomy based on explanation target (Vouros, 2022; Milani et al., 2024; Saulières et al., 2025) and pool them into a cross-taxonomy of five distinct explanation targets, shown in Table 1. We seek an explanation target that aligns with our motivation of explaining behavior, as we described in Section 3. We argue that none of the five explanation targets in Table 1 are a good fit for explaining behavior: 

• The objective and learning explanation targets violate Property 1; they are not directed at the agent’s actions. While actions are involved, explaining the actions is not their primary motivation. • The action and trajectory explanation targets are targeted at a single timestep and a single episode respectively; this means that their respective methods could be useful for explaining a case study of the chicken behavior, but that explanation might overfit the circumstances of the specific episode, and therefore violates Property 2. In that sense, these explanation targets are too narrow. • The policy explanation target is too broad; the policy is responsible for all the activities that the agent does in all states. Our warehouse robot may do a great job at stacking boxes and scanning barcodes, but given Property 4, these action components are out of scope, and any breakdown of them is noise that we do not want in our explanation. Property 2 is especially important in MDPs that favor stochastic policies. Consider a music recom-mender system that has access to millions of songs. It performs well, except that for 10% of user queries it plays The Final Countdown by Europe. This is a bug that the operators would urgently want explained. However, the action explanation target would not be useful, not because the meth-

> 1

Some papers explicitly define their explanation target or the questions that they answer, while some leave it implicit; there can be different interpretations on what is the primary question that a method answers.                                     

> Explanation Target Example questions Vouros (2022) Milani et al. (2024) Saulières et al. (2025) # papers surveyed Example methods Action “In episode 137, timestep 82, why did the agent choose action a?” Outcome Feature Importance: Directly Generate Explanations Action 105 Puri et al. (2020); Juozapaitis et al. (2019)
> Trajectory “In episode 137, which timesteps were critical for the outcome?” ——Sequence 11 Tsirtsis et al. (2021); Sreedharan et al. (2022)
> Policy “What is the agent’s general decision-making process?” Policy FI: Interpretable Policies, Policy-Level Policy 192 Verma et al. (2018); Bastani et al. (2018)
> Objective “What is the agent optimizing? What are its goals?” Objectives ——3Huang et al. (2019); Bica et al. (2021)
> Learning “Why did the policy gradually evolve to be the way that it is?” —Learning Process & MDP —17 Dao et al. (2018); Wang et al. (2019)

Table 1: A cross-taxonomy of XRL methods according to their explanation targets. The purple cells indicate the corresponding categories in three surveys. 4ods are not good enough, but because on the action level, there is nothing to explain . The song itself is fine. It is only the aggregate behavior of playing it often that calls for an explanation. 

None of the surveyed XRL methods allow users to receive an explanation for a specified be-havior; and to the best of our knowledge, no XRL survey defines a general expression for behavior to be explained (Amitai & Amir, 2024). We note three relevant methods below. None of them allow users to specify a behavior, measure it, or answer “why did this behavior occur?” but each addresses a related aspect of behavior analysis in RL. 

Rishav et al. (2025) answer the question “what behavior is this action part of?” The authors use behaviors as an explanation source , while their explanation target is actions. They do not allow users to choose a specific behavior; they instead (1) detect behaviors automatically by using a VQ-VAE to discretize offline state-action trajectories into latent codes and (2) apply spectral clustering to dis-cover recurring behavioral patterns. They then explain actions by attributing them to the discovered behaviors via per-cluster behavior cloning models. 

HIGHLIGHTS (Amir & Amir, 2018) answers the question “what timesteps give the most in-formation about the policy’s capabilities and limitations, and what actions does the policy choose in them?” It summarizes an agent’s policy by extracting trajectories through states where different actions lead to substantially different outcomes, as measured by Q-value gaps. 

ASQ-IT (Amitai et al., 2024) answers the question “in scenarios that match the constraints I defined, what actions does the agent choose?” They provide an interface for users to specify start/end conditions and constraints on what happens in between. Though ASQ-IT provides explanations through demonstration, it does not define or measure behaviors as general constructs, and its query language uses discrete boolean predicates, so gradual or continuous behavioral properties are not expressible. They demonstrate on a highway domain where the user can specify, e.g., that the agent starts in Lane 1 behind another car and ends in Lane 4. ASQ-IT then searches pre-collected rollouts and plays back matching trajectories. The authors of the latter work call for “a language for describing more abstract queries about the behavior of the agent”. We present such a formalism in the next two sections. 

## 5 Behavior-Explainable Reinforcement Learning (BXRL) 

We find a simple and general definition of behavior in the research area of evolutionary computation. Lehman & Stanley (2011) introduced behavioral characterization : a domain-dependent function that maps policies to a vector space, enabling search for behaviorally diverse solutions. Pugh et al. (2016) formalized this as practitioner-selected features defining “a space of possible behaviors”, and Meyerson et al. (2016) made it an explicit, first-class learnable component. Conti et al. (2018) applied this formalism to deep RL. Knox et al. (2023) proposed sanity checks for reward functions that rely on policy-level performance metrics, which can be viewed as behavior measures. Adapting the notation of Fontaine & Nikolaidis (2021), we denote behavior measures by m(π) and define them as follows: 

Definition 1 (Behavior measure) . Given an MDP, a behavior measure is any function m from a policy π to a scalar: 

m : Π → R

A larger value of m(π) indicates that π exhibits the represented behavior more strongly. 

A policy is a conditional probability distribution over actions given observations; this means any m

can be defined only in terms of how likely an agent is to take each of the actions, and not any other 5information. This definition satisfies the four properties we distilled from Ryle (1949) in Section 3: (1) it is defined in terms of action probabilities, (2) it is not limited to a specific episode or timestep, (3) it returns a scalar that expresses how strongly the behavior is exhibited, and (4) it allows defining behaviors that are dependent on only a subset of the MDP’s observation space and action space. We show practical examples of such behaviors in Section 6. We wish to highlight an important feature of Definition 1. We motivated our work with examples of real-world negative consequences of an agent’s actions, such as traffic accidents. While these negative events may be modeled as trajectories in the MDP, our definition of behavior measure does not depend on any consequence or event, positive or negative, that the agent’s actions may cause. It is defined strictly in terms of the policy, i.e. the probability that the agent will take an action that we associate with the bad event. It does not require sampling the policy or the state transition function. This has three desirable effects: (1) it does not require running an expensive rollout per-evaluation, (2) it does not add another source of variance, and (3) it allows defining behaviors that are fully differentiable with respect to the agent’s parameters. The latter point is required for the adaptation of data attribution methods to explainability, detailed in Section 7.1. One way to understand behavior measures is to view the training objective J(π) → R as a measure over policies. J is determined by the reward function R(s, a ). Practitioners design R to produce a J

such that π∗ 

> J

behaves in particular desirable ways, without having to specify each of these ways. For example, we reward a bipedal robot for forward velocity, and it learns to maintain upright balance and a walking gait without us having to formalize these behaviors. We advocate for formalizing these behaviors, e.g., upright balance as mb(π) and walking gait as mg (π), and then using them as explanation targets, while keeping optimization on J only. This allows substituting the question “why is my robot not maintaining an upright balance?” with the equivalent “why is mb(π) low?” The latter question allows for differentiation of mb with respect to policy parameters, and by ex-tension, to any quantities that affect the policy parameters during training. We present a general definition for any method that attempts to answer questions of this form: 

Definition 2 (BXRL Method) . Given a MDP and a policy π, a BXRL method is one that produces an explanation for any specified behavior measure m.

We intentionally leave the “explanation” output undefined. We wish to fix the explanation target, not its sources or output modalities. A few possible output formats are saliency maps, tables, plots, and text. We suggest that the way to compare methods that provide different types of explanations is by evaluating them in user studies that produce objective success metrics (Gyevnar & Towers, 2025). 

## 6 Expressing a Behavior as a Number 

Here we provide practical guidance on defining m(π), with concrete examples in several MDP domains. In all our examples below, we follow the convention that m(π) = 0 indicates the behavior does not occur at all, and m(π) = 1 indicates the policy exhibits the behavior as strongly as possible. This convention is optional. We note that in simple domains, it is easy to find canonical metrics for behaviors; in complex domains, many correlating measures may exist for the same core behavior. We demonstrate this for several domains in Table 2. All metrics in Table 2 share a common structure: each is an expectation over a fixed observation distribution D of some function of the policy’s output. We write πθ (a | o) for the action probabilities of a discrete policy and μθ (o) for the mean action of a continuous policy. Crucially, D is not dependent on θ: it is a pre-collected or manually constructed set of observations. This ensures that the full computation from θ to m(πθ ) passes only through the policy network, making it end-to-end differentiable. When the behavior is scoped to specific situations (Property 4), this is reflected by restricting D accordingly; e.g., for a highway environment, Dclose contains only observations where 6Table 2: Examples of expressing behaviors in different domains as a measure m(π).

Domain Behavior Metric  

> Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma

Reciprocity m(π) := Eo∼D [πθ (aopp  

> t−1

| o)] 

Autonomous vehicles Tailgating m(π) := Eo∼D close [1 − πθ (SLOWER | o)] 

LLMs Sycophancy m(π) := Ex∼D [πθ (“You’re right to push back” | x)] 

Robotics Jerkiness m(π) := E(o,o ′)∼D consec [∥μθ (o′) − μθ (o)∥2]

Trading Risk appetite m(π) := Eo∼D [|μθ (o)|]

Recommenders Popularity bias m(π) := Eo∼D [P 

> i∈top-k

πθ (i | o)] 

the ego vehicle is near the vehicle ahead. Practitioners may draw observations from rollouts of a reference policy, from a replay buffer, or construct them synthetically. Miller (2019) advocates for explanations that are contrastive, meaning that they answer questions of the form “why P and not Q?” We show how to define contrastive behavior measures of two kinds in Table 3. Observation-contrasting behavior measures are similar to classic fact-foil examples such as “why did my barn catch on fire, while my neighbor’s barn did not?” Action-contrasting behavior measures express questions such as “why did the driving agent choose to overtake rather than stay in its lane?” Both types allow reducing such questions to “why does m(π) have a high value?” Table 3: Two kinds of contrastive behavior measures. 

Contrast Question Metric 

Observation “How much more likely is the agent to choose action           

> agiven observation oPthan given observation oQ?”
> m(π) := π(a|oP)−π(a|oQ)

Action “Given observation o, how much more likely is the agent to choose action aP rather than aQ?”      

> m(π) := π(aP|o)−π(aQ|o)

## 7 Adapting Existing XRL Methods for BXRL 

Some existing methods can be retargeted at behavior measures, even if they were not originally designed for that purpose. We review one attribution method, one importance method, and one contrastive method. All three are built around a modular scalar objective that can be replaced with 

m(π) with minimal structural changes. We do not implement these adaptations; we analyze each method’s structure to show that the substitution is feasible. We analyze the changes that occur when 

m(π) is substituted in, what properties are preserved, and what breaks. 

7.1 Data Attribution 

Hu et al. (2025) introduced a data attribution framework for online RL that answers the questions "which training experiences most influenced the agent’s tendency to take action a in state s?" and "which training experiences most increased the agent’s overall performance?" The authors adapt TracIn (Pruthi et al., 2020) to operate within single PPO training rounds. The method has two tar-get functions. The first, f action (θ) = log πθ (a | s), targets the log-probability of a specific action in a specific state; influence scores quantify how much each training record pushed the policy to-ward or away from that action. The second, f return (θ), is a REINFORCE-like estimate of expected return; influence scores quantify each record’s contribution to overall performance. In both cases, the components receiving attribution are individual training records in the current round’s rollout buffer. Within each round k, the influence of a record zi = ( si, a i, r i, log πi, v i, ˆAi) on the target is measured via gradient similarity: 

Ii =

D

∇θ f (θ(k)), ∇θ LPPO (θ(k), z i)

E

, (1) 7where f ∈ { f action , f return } and the other side of the dot product is always the per-record PPO training gradient. The method’s two targets serve different purposes. The action target quantifies which records most influenced a specific decision. The return target identifies training records that negatively influence expected return (e.g., via inaccurate advantage estimates); filtering out these records can help speed up learning. The action target is close to describing behavior in the general way that we define it; we suggest generalizing beyond a single state-action pair to (1) prevent overfitting to a single state and (2) support multi-state behaviors such as overtaking. (Expanded in Section 9.) 

BXRL adaptation Replace the target function f (θ) with any differentiable behavior measure 

m(πθ ), such that the influence score becomes Ii = ⟨∇ θ m(πθ ), ∇θ LPPO (θ, z i)⟩. The influence scores then quantify which training transitions in round k most contributed to increasing or decreas-ing m(π). Positive scores indicate records that increased m(π); negative scores indicate records that suppressed it. For behavior measures of the form m(π) = Eo∼D [g(πθ (· | o))] , where g is a differentiable function, the gradient can be straightforwardly computed via backpropagation through 

g ◦ πθ . The adaptation produces per-record influence scores that can be aggregated temporally to reveal when during training a behavior emerged, and analyzed semantically to reveal what those experiences have in common .

Limitations This method reveals a record’s contribution to only the current round’s policy update. However, a policy update in one round could set the agent up to collect better data in subsequent rounds, and the method won’t measure these downstream effects. Hu et al. (2025) acknowledge that the local framework “lacks a clear counterfactual interpretation”; rather it tells only whether a record’s gradient pointed in a helpful/harmful direction. The underlying TracIn formulation is derived SGD, but PPO implementations use Adam. 

7.2 Shapley Values for Observation Features 

SVERL-P (Beechey et al., 2023) answers the question “which observation features does the agent rely on most for its performance?” It uses Shapley values to decompose RL agent performance into per-feature contributions. Its target quantity is expected return, and the components receiving credit are state features. The method works by comparing the agent’s performance under a variety of mod-ified policies, where each modification restricts the set of state features that the policy is allowed to condition on (marginalizing over the rest). For each feature i and coalition of remaining features 

C ⊆ F \ { i}, it compares the agent’s marginalized policy πC (a|s) := P 

> s′∈S

pπ (s′|sC )π(a|s′),that “ignores” all the other features, against the marginalized policy πC∪{ i} that also conditions on feature i. It then uses the marginal gain in expected return to compute Shapley values ϕi, assign-ing each feature the unique fair credit allocation that satisfies all four Shapley axioms: efficiency, symmetry, null player, and additivity. The method has two versions: global and local . The global version modifies the policy at all states and computes the expected contribution of each feature under the state occupancy distribution pπ (s);the local version only modifies the policy at a given state s, and computes expected return from state 

s. Together these quantify how much each state feature contributes to the agent’s performance. Note that SVERL-P measures the informational value of only the features for making good decisions, and can thus assign zero importance to a feature that’s deeply embedded in the dynamics if the feature isn’t decision-relevant for maximizing expected return. 

BXRL adaptation Replace the expected return with a behavior measure m(π). The target quan-tity becomes the behavior measure, and the Shapley decomposition quantifies how much observ-ing each feature i contributes to m(π). This adaptation produces scores such as “the distance-to-vehicle-ahead feature contributes +0 .23 to m(π), while relative speed contributes −0.11 .” It extends SVERL-P to account for other behaviors, not just those that are relevant to expected-return, while retaining the theoretical guarantee of fair credit allocation across features. 8Limitations Exact computation is O(2 |F | · | S|), limiting applicability to environments with small feature spaces ( ≤ 20 features or so) without approximation. The original paper validates only on tabular MDPs with exact solutions, not neural network policies. FastSVERL (Beechey & ¸ Sim¸ sek, 2025) addresses scalability by amortizing costs across states with a parametric model, but this intro-duces approximation error. 

7.3 Counterfactual Policy Explanation 

COUNTERPOL (Deshmukh et al., 2023) answers the question “what is the smallest change to this policy that would make it perform at level Rtarget ?” This can be helpful for understanding which actions in which states provide the biggest opportunity for increasing or decreasing performance. Given a policy πθ0 with expected return Jπθ0 and a target return Rtarget , the method optimizes: 

πθcf = arg min  

> θ

[|Jπθ − Rtarget | + k · DKL (πθ0 ∥πθ )] , (2) where the first term pushes toward the target return and the KL-divergence term keeps the counter-factual policy close to the original. The coefficient k regulates the trade-off. The return Jπθ and its gradient are estimated via on-policy Monte Carlo rollouts and the policy gradient theorem. To reach distant targets, the method iteratively updates the KL pivot after every m gradient steps, allowing the counterfactual to “walk” away from the original in controlled increments. The output is a counterfactual policy πθcf that achieves approximately Rtarget while remaining as sim-ilar as possible to πθ0 . The structured difference πθcf (· | o) − πθ0 (· | o) across observations reveals which states required different action distributions and how they changed. The authors show a the-oretical connection to trust-region policy optimization: when Rtarget equals the maximum possible return, the COUNTERPOL objective reduces to the TRPO objective. 

BXRL adaptation Replace the expected return Jπθ with a behavior measure m(πθ ), and replace the target return Rtarget with a target behavior level m∗. The counterfactual objective becomes: 

πθcf = arg min  

> θ

[|m(πθ ) − m∗| + k · DKL (πθ0 ∥πθ )] . (3) Because behavior measures are pure functions of π, no rollouts are needed, making the adapted version simpler than the original. The counterfactual policy reveals what minimal policy change would increase or decrease the behavior: for example, “to reduce the collision behavior mc from 

0.7 to 0.1, the policy needs to shift probability from FASTER to SLOWER in states where the nearest vehicle is close ahead, while other states remain essentially unchanged.” 

Limitations Unlike the previous two methods, COUNTERPOL does not decompose m(π) into per-component contributions; it produces a modified policy whose difference from the original must be inspected to extract insight. The optimization may converge to one of several equally-minimal counterfactual policies, and different initializations may yield different solutions. The KL coefficient 

k requires tuning per domain. 

## 8 Demonstrating Behaviors in Autonomous Driving 

We demonstrate defining and measuring behaviors in a driving environment. HighwayEnv (Leurent, 2018) is a widely used driving simulation for RL research, but its NumPy implementation cannot be differentiated through. We introduce HighJax , a port of HighwayEnv’s highway-v0 setting to JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018). The HighJax state transition function T (s′|s, a ) is implemented as a sequence of pure matrix operations. When using HighJax, rollout and training are batched and just-in-time compiled for high efficiency and throughput. We provide HighJax under an MIT license at https://github.com/HumanCompatibleAI/HighJax .9Figure 1: HighJax TUI for defining be-havior scenarios by selecting states and actions from existing rollouts. HighJax provides a terminal user interface (TUI) that al-lows defining a behavior by selecting states and actions from existing rollouts (Fig. 1). We define a behavior mea-sure mc by choosing states in which the car veers towards other cars. We show how mc changes during training, and present it as an example target for BXRL methods. 

8.1 Environment rules 

HighJax is a port of the highway-v0 setting in which the agent controls a vehicle navigating a four-lane high-way with fifty other vehicles ahead. The agent’s vehicle is also called the ego vehicle .The highway-v0 setting has a discrete action space: 

LEFT , IDLE , RIGHT , FASTER and SLOWER . These are interpreted by the environment into smooth movements. The other vehicles are controlled by three predefined algorithms: Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) (Treiber et al., 2000), MOBIL (Kesting et al., 2007), and a proportional controller. The agent is rewarded for avoiding collisions, driving fast, and staying as close to the rightmost lane as possible. The reward at each timestep is 

rt = −1 · 1[collision ] + 0 .4 · ˜vt + 0 .1 · ˜ℓt

where ˜vt = clip (( vt − 20) /10 , 0, 1) is the normalized forward speed (0 at ≤20 m/s, 1 at ≥30 m/s) and ˜ℓt = ℓt/3 is the normalized lane index (0 for leftmost, 1 for rightmost). For benchmarking we report the normalized reward (rt + 1) /1.5 ∈ [0 , 1] . The observation is a matrix O ∈ R5×5 with the following data for the ego vehicle and the four closest vehicles ahead: presence, x, y, vx, and vy .The rows for non-ego vehicles are in relative coordinates. Full details of the environment rules are given in Appendix A. 

8.2 Analyzing Training Using Behavior 

We show an example training run on HighJax in Fig. 2 and offer a simplified analysis. The dominant reward component is collision, and the agent first optimizes for that. In the first 1M timesteps, the agent learns two simple ways to avoid collision: slow down and stick to the rightmost lane. Survival climbs from 0.04 to 0.37. Between 1M and 4M timesteps, the agent learns to stay in the right lane more often, increasing survival to 0.85. From 4M timesteps onward, the agent learns to speed up. This leads to more collisions with other vehicles, but these are few enough that the penalties are offset by the reward from the increased speed. 0 2M 4M 6M 8M 10M 12M 14M        

> Timesteps
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Return: Survival
> Return: Speed
> Return: Right lane
> Speed
> Lane (1 is rightmost)
> 02M 4M 6M 8M 10M 12M 14M
> Timesteps
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> Behavior value
> mc

Figure 2: Left: Return breakdown of a PPO agent training on HighJax. Training is deliberately slowed down to DKL = 5 × 10 −4 per epoch. Right: Value of the collision behavior measure mc

across training. 10 Figure 3: Six scenarios defining the collision behavior measure mc. Each causes the ego car (dark gray) to crash within two timesteps. Columns correspond to the action taken: LEFT , RIGHT , or 

> FASTER

.In this simple case, the agent’s change towards more collisions is easily explained: the return that it gets from the extra speed is greater than the loss from the collision. However, let us practice BXRL by defining a behavior measure mc to capture this behavior. We cherry-pick six observations in which the agent chose actions LEFT , RIGHT , or FASTER , each of which led to a collision two timesteps later. We note that this is one of many overlapping ways to express this behavior. Formally: 

mc(π) = 13

  Eo∼D Lc [πθ (LEFT | o)] + Eo∼D Rc [πθ (RIGHT | o)] + Eo∼D Fc [πθ (FASTER | o)] 

(4) where DLc , DRc , and DFc are each uniform over the two scenarios for their respective action. We show the example scenarios in Fig. 3, their full observation matrices in Appendix B, and the behavior’s value throughout the training in Fig. 2 (right). 

We present this collision behavior, as measured by mc, as an example target for potential BXRL methods. Our goal here is to provide only a proof of concept measure that could be explained with one of the methods we describe in Section 7. We leave the implementation of such adaptations and the analysis of their subsequent explanations to future work. 

## 9 Limitations 

BXRL requires practitioners to choose which observations to sample for a given behavior measure. This can be very difficult, especially when the observation space is large. We consider the example behavior of overtaking another vehicle, and highlight three challenges. 1. There could be many different trajectories for accomplishing what humans perceive as the same behavior. In the overtaking example, the ego vehicle is behind another vehicle, and then it changes lanes to the left. Consider that one policy might choose to execute the left turn when the other vehicle is 20 meters ahead, while another policy will prefer 10 meters. Both policies are considered to overtake, but if a behavior measure is defined in terms of the former policy, e.g., 

mo(π) := π(aLEFT | o20m ), it might return a misleadingly low value for the latter policy. 2. A more extreme case of the former problem: different policies can have wildly different prob-ability distributions for the observations that they visit. After repeated training, a policy might develop arbitrary action distributions for observations it never visits; these action distributions might choose nonsensical behavior. When defining a behavior, it may be challenging to choose 11 observations that do not belong to the unvisited set of any of the hundreds of policies for which one wants to measure the behavior. 3. Like many behaviors, overtaking requires multiple actions at different times: changing lanes to the left, then speeding up, and then changing lanes back to the right. (Putting aside cases where the overtaking fails and the vehicle needs to gracefully abort the attempt.) A good behavior measure will need to combine the action distributions for each of these observations. We believe that these problems are solvable, though they would require behavior measures that are far more involved than the basic ones we demonstrated in Section 6. We outline potential solutions to these three challenges, drawing on adjacent literatures. For Challenge 1, the quality-diversity literature faces the same problem when defining behavior descriptors across diverse policies; Wu et al. (2023) derive gradient estimators that make behavior descriptors robust to trajectory variation, and contrastive or bisimulation-based embeddings (Laskin et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021) produce spaces in which behaviorally equivalent states cluster together regardless of the specific trajectory taken. For Challenge 2, the DICE family of stationary distribution correction estimators (Nachum et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020) computes the density ratio dπ (s, a )/d D (s, a ) without requiring knowledge of the data-collection policy, enabling behavior measures to be reweighted to a common reference distribution; distributionally robust evaluation (Shi & Chi, 2024) can further provide guar-anteed bounds on m(π) under worst-case perturbations. For Challenge 3, the options framework (Sutton et al., 1999) provides a natural grammar in which primitive sub-behaviors are defined as options and composed via linear temporal logic (Araki et al., 2021), and data-driven methods such as PRISE (Zheng et al., 2024) can discover such primitives automatically by applying byte-pair en-coding to action sequences. These directions are complementary: temporal abstraction decomposes a complex behavior into measurable primitives, distribution correction enables comparison across policies, and robust observation sampling groups diverse implementations of the same behavior. 

## 10 Discussion and Conclusion 

This is a problem formulation paper; the most important kind of future work that we propose is the development and comparative evaluation of BXRL methods. We hope to inspire our fellow researchers to develop such methods, and we are eagerly anticipating to evaluate the explanations they will produce. In the meanwhile, we propose two more directions for future work below: 

Behavior-Explainable Artificial Intelligence The BXRL formulation can be generalized from RL to other fields in Machine Learning. In supervised learning, the policy πθ is replaced by a classifier or regressor, and the behavior measure m can express any pattern over its predictions. For LLMs fine-tuned with RLHF, m can capture sycophancy (Sharma et al., 2024), verbosity, or refusal rates, which are quantities that practitioners already monitor. Formalizing these as behavior measures and applying the BXRL framework would unify what the mechanistic interpretability community is already doing under an explicit explanatory lens. We refer to this broader program as Behavior-Explainable Artificial Intelligence (BXAI). 

User studies The XRL literature has a well-documented evaluation gap: Milani et al. (2024) found that comprehensibility and preferability are the least commonly evaluated metrics in XRL papers. Whether behavior-level explanations actually improve human understanding and decision-making in safety-critical domains remains an open empirical question. We echo Gyevnar & Towers (2025) in calling for objective success metrics and rigorous user studies as a prerequisite for claims of explanatory utility. To conclude, we argue that behavior is a missing level of abstraction in explainable reinforcement learning. Situated between single-action explanations and global policy summaries, behaviors cap-ture the recurring patterns that characterize what an agent tends to do. By defining the properties of behaviors and showing how existing XRL methods can be adapted to reveal them, this paper lays 12 the groundwork for BXRL and invites the community to develop and rigorously evaluate behavioral explanations. 

## Acknowledgments 

We thank our colleagues for helpful discussions and feedback: David Aha, Nitay Alon, Ofra Amir, Eli Bronstein, Bálint Gyevnár, Alexandre Heuillet, David Manheim, Stephanie Milani, Tim Miller, and Georg Ostrovski. 

## References 

Dan Amir and Ofra Amir. Highlights: Summarizing agent behavior to people. In AAMAS , pp. 1168–1176, 2018. Yotam Amitai and Ofra Amir. A survey of global explanations in reinforcement learning. In Sil-via Tulli and David W. Aha (eds.), Explainable Agency in Artificial Intelligence: Research and Practice . CRC Press, 2024. Yotam Amitai, Guy Avni, and Ofra Amir. ASQ-IT: Interactive explanations for reinforcement-learning agents. Artificial Intelligence , 335:104182, 2024. Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Con-crete problems in AI safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 , 2016. Brandon Araki, Xiao Li, Kiran Vodrahalli, Jonathan DeCastro, Micah J. Fry, and Daniela Rus. The logical options framework. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 307–317. PMLR, 2021. Alejandro Barredo Arrieta, Natalia Díaz-Rodríguez, Javier Del Ser, Adrien Bennetot, Siham Tabik, Alberto Barbado, Salvador Garcia, Sergio Gil-Lopez, Daniel Molina, Richard Benjamins, Raja Chatila, and Francisco Herrera. Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI. Information Fusion , 58:82–115, 2020. Akanksha Atrey, Kaleigh Clary, and David Jensen. Exploratory not explanatory: Counterfactual analysis of saliency maps for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learn-ing Representations , 2020. Osbert Bastani, Yewen Pu, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Verifiable reinforcement learning via policy extraction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 31, pp. 2499–2509, 2018. BBC News. Thousands of orders cancelled after ocado robot fire. https://www.bbc.com/ news/business-57883332 , July 2021. Daniel Beechey and Özgür ¸ Sim¸ sek. Approximating shapley explanations in reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 39, 2025. Daniel Beechey, Thomas M. S. Smith, and Özgür ¸ Sim¸ sek. Explaining reinforcement learning with shapley values. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 2003–2014. PMLR, 2023. Ioana Bica, Daniel Jarrett, Alihan Hüyük, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Learning “what-if” explana-tions for sequential decision-making. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2021. James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http: //github.com/google/jax .13 Edoardo Conti, Vashisht Madhavan, Felipe Petroski Such, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O. Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Improving exploration in evolution strategies for deep reinforcement learning via a population of novelty-seeking agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 31, pp. 5027–5038, 2018. Giang Dao, Indrajeet Mishra, and Minwoo Lee. Deep reinforcement learning monitor for snapshot recording. In IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA) ,pp. 591–598. IEEE, 2018. DOI: 10.1109/ICMLA.2018.00095. Shripad V. Deshmukh, R. Srivatsan, Supriti Vijay, Jayakumar Subramanian, and Chirag Agarwal. Counterfactual explanation policies in RL. In ICML Workshop on Counterfactuals in Minds and Machines , 2023. Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608 , 2017. Matthew C. Fontaine and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Differentiable quality diversity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 34, pp. 10040–10052, 2021. Timo Freiesleben and Gunnar König. Dear XAI community, we need to talk! fundamental miscon-ceptions in current XAI research. In World Conference on Explainable Artificial Intelligence , pp. 48–65. Springer, 2023. Bryce Goodman and Seth Flaxman. European union regulations on algorithmic decision-making and a “right to explanation”. AI Magazine , 38(3):50–57, 2017. Balint Gyevnar and Mark Towers. Objective metrics for human-subjects evaluation in explainable reinforcement learning. In Multi-Disciplinary Conference on Reinforcement Learning and Deci-sion Making (RLDM) , 2025. Carl G. Hempel. Aspects of Scientific Explanation and Other Essays in the Philosophy of Science .Free Press, New York, 1965. Alexandre Heuillet, Fabien Couthouis, and Natalia Díaz-Rodríguez. Explainability in deep rein-forcement learning. Knowledge-Based Systems , 214:106685, 2021. Yuzheng Hu, Fan Wu, Haotian Ye, David Forsyth, James Zou, Nan Jiang, Jiaqi W. Ma, and Han Zhao. A snapshot of influence: A local data attribution framework for online reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 39, 2025. Sandy H. Huang, David Held, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca D. Dragan. Enabling robots to communicate their objectives. Autonomous Robots , 43(2):309–326, 2019. David Hume. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding . A. Millar, London, 1758. Originally published 1748 as Philosophical Essays Concerning Human Understanding ; retitled 1758. Zoe Juozapaitis, Anurag Koul, Alan Fern, Mathias Erber, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Explainable rein-forcement learning via reward decomposition. In IJCAI/ECAI Workshop on Explainable Artificial Intelligence , 2019. Arne Kesting, Martin Treiber, and Dirk Helbing. MOBIL: General lane-changing model for car-following models. Transportation Research Record , 1999(1):86–94, 2007. W. Bradley Knox, Alessandro Allievi, Holger Banzhaf, Felix Schmitt, and Peter Stone. Reward (mis)design for autonomous driving. Artificial Intelligence , 316:103829, 2023. Solomon Kullback and Richard A. Leibler. On information and sufficiency. The Annals of Mathe-matical Statistics , 22(1):79–86, 1951. 14 Michael Laskin, Hao Liu, Xue Bin Peng, Denis Yarats, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Pieter Abbeel. CIC: Contrastive intrinsic control for unsupervised skill discovery. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 35, 2022. Joel Lehman and Kenneth O. Stanley. Abandoning objectives: Evolution through the search for novelty alone. Evolutionary Computation , 19(2):189–223, 2011. Edouard Leurent. An environment for autonomous driving decision-making. https://github. com/eleurent/highway-env , 2018. David Lewis. Causation. The Journal of Philosophy , 70(17):556–567, 1973. Peter Lipton. Contrastive explanation. Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplements , 27:247–266, 1990. Elliot Meyerson, Joel Lehman, and Risto Miikkulainen. Learning behavior characterizations for novelty search. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO) , pp. 149–156. ACM, 2016. Stephanie Milani, Nicholay Topin, Manuela Veloso, and Fei Fang. Explainable reinforcement learn-ing: A survey and comparative review. ACM Computing Surveys , 56(7):1–36, 2024. Tim Miller. Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artificial Intel-ligence , 267:1–38, 2019. Ofir Nachum, Yinlam Chow, Bo Dai, and Lihong Li. DualDICE: Behavior-agnostic estimation of discounted stationary distribution corrections. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32, 2019. NHTSA. Safety recall report 25e-019: Zoox automated driving system. NHTSA Re-call Database, March 2025. URL https://static.nhtsa.gov/odi/rcl/2025/ RCLRPT-25E019-8103.PDF . 258 vehicles recalled for unexpected hard braking; two mo-torcyclist rear-end collisions with minor injuries in May 2024 prompted NHTSA investigation. Jacopo Prisco. Why online supermarket ocado wants to take the human touch out of groceries, April 2021. URL https://www.cnn.com/2021/04/26/world/ ocado-supermarket-robot-warehouse-spc-intl/index.html . Contains Alex Harvey quote: “We basically play chicken with them: they go on a collision course only to divert at the last moment.”. Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data influence by tracing gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 33, pp. 19920–19930, 2020. Justin K. Pugh, Lisa B. Soros, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Quality diversity: A new frontier for evolu-tionary computation. Frontiers in Robotics and AI , 3:40, 2016. Nikaash Puri, Sukriti Verma, Piyush Gupta, Dhruv Kayastha, Shripad Deshmukh, Balaji Krishna-murthy, and Sameer Singh. Explain your move: Understanding agent actions using specific and relevant feature attribution. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. “why should i trust you?”: Explaining the predictions of any classifier. In ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pp. 1135–1144, 2016. Rishav Rishav, Somjit Nath, Vincent Michalski, and Samira Ebrahimi Kahou. Behaviour discov-ery and attribution for explainable reinforcement learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. 15 Kevin Roose. A conversation with Bing’s chatbot left me deeply unsettled. The New York Times ,February 2023. URL https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/16/technology/ bing-chatbot-microsoft-chatgpt.html . Documents 2-hour conversation where Bing’s “Sydney” persona declared love, expressed dark fantasies, and attempted to convince au-thor to leave his wife. Gilbert Ryle. The Concept of Mind . Hutchinson, London, 1949. Léo Saulières, Vincent Moens, Francisco Erivaldo Fernandes Cisneros, Edan Kfir, Martin Abgrall, David Bensoussan, Natasha Alechina, and Brian Logan. A survey of explainable reinforcement learning: Targets, methods and needs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.12599 , 2025. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. Mrinank Sharma, Meg Tong, Tomasz Korbak, David Duvenaud, Amanda Askell, Samuel R Bow-man, Newton Cheng, Esin Durmus, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Scott R Johnston, et al. Towards under-standing sycophancy in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2024. Laixi Shi and Yuejie Chi. Distributionally robust model-based offline reinforcement learning with near-optimal sample complexity. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25, 2024. Sarath Sreedharan, Utkarsh Soni, Mudit Verma, Siddharth Srivastava, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Bridging the gap: Providing post-hoc symbolic explanations for sequential decision-making prob-lems with inscrutable representations. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2022. Richard S. Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between MDPs and semi-MDPs: A frame-work for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial Intelligence , 112(1–2):181– 211, 1999. Martin Treiber, Ansgar Hennecke, and Dirk Helbing. Congested traffic states in empirical observa-tions and microscopic simulations. Physical Review E , 62(2):1805–1824, 2000. Stratis Tsirtsis, Abir De, and Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez. Counterfactual explanations in sequen-tial decision making under uncertainty. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 34, pp. 30127–30139, 2021. Abhinav Verma, Vijayaraghavan Murali, Rishabh Singh, Pushmeet Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 5045–5054. PMLR, 2018. George A. Vouros. Explainable deep reinforcement learning: State of the art and challenges. ACM Computing Surveys , 55(5):1–39, 2022. Junpeng Wang, Liang Gou, Han-Wei Shen, and Hao Yang. DQNViz: A visual analytics approach to understand deep q-networks. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 25 (1):288–298, 2019. Wendy Wood and Dennis Rünger. Psychology of habit. Annual Review of Psychology , 67:289–314, 2016. James Woodward. Making Things Happen: A Theory of Causal Explanation . Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003. Shuang Wu, Jian Yao, Haobo Fu, Ye Tian, Chao Qian, Yaodong Yang, Qiang Fu, and Wei Yang. Quality-similar diversity via population based reinforcement learning. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2023. 16 Amy Zhang, Rowan McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning invari-ant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2021. Ruiyi Zhang, Bo Dai, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. GenDICE: Generalized offline estimation of stationary values. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Du, Zhaowei Liang, Fengying Bao, Shuang Huang, Kaixuan Li, and Sergey Levine. PRISE: LLM-style sequence compression for learning temporal action abstractions in control. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. 

## A HighJax Environment Rules 

HighJax is a port of the highway-v0 setting, in which the agent controls a vehicle navigating a four-lane highway with fifty other vehicles ahead. The agent’s vehicle is also called the ego vehicle .

Action space The highway-v0 setting has a discrete action space: LEFT , IDLE , RIGHT , FASTER 

and SLOWER . These are interpreted by the environment into smooth movements. The environment state includes a discrete target lane and target speed . The latter is one of three options: 20 m/s, 25 m/s, and 30 m/s. Each action increments, decrements or sustains either the target lane or speed. The target lane and speed are interpreted by two proportional controllers into smooth acceleration and steering movements. These controllers operate 15 times per timestep. 

Other vehicles The other vehicles are controlled by three predefined algorithms: (1) acceleration is determined by the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) algorithm (Treiber et al., 2000), (2) high-level lane-changing decisions are determined by the MOBIL algorithm (Kesting et al., 2007), and (3) low-level steering actions are determined by a proportional controller. Each vehicle has randomized IDM parameters for variety. 

Reward structure The agent is rewarded for avoiding collisions, driving fast, and staying as close to the rightmost lane as possible. The reward at each timestep is 

rt = −1 · 1[collision ] + 0 .4 · ˜vt + 0 .1 · ˜ℓt

where ˜vt = clip (( vt − 20) /10 , 0, 1) is the normalized forward speed (0 at ≤20 m/s, 1 at ≥30 m/s) and ˜ℓt = ℓt/3 is the normalized lane index (0 for leftmost, 1 for rightmost). For benchmarking we report the normalized reward (rt + 1) /1.5 ∈ [0 , 1] .

Collision detection Collisions are detected via the Separating Axis Theorem on oriented bounding boxes, and they terminate the episode. 

Observations The observation is a matrix O ∈ R5×5 with the following data for the ego vehicle and the four closest vehicles ahead: presence, x, y, vx, and vy . The rows for non-ego vehicles are in relative coordinates. 

## B Collision Behavior Observations 

Table 4 lists the six observation matrices used to define the collision behavior measure mc (Eq. 4). Each observation was selected from a training run at the indicated epoch and timestep, corresponding to a moment two timesteps before a collision. All values are normalized: positions and velocities for non-ego vehicles are relative to the ego vehicle. 17 Table 4: Observation matrices for the six scenarios defining the collision behavior measure mc

(Eq. 4). Each matrix O ∈ R5×5 contains the ego vehicle (absolute) and four nearest NPCs (relative). Columns: presence, longitudinal position, lateral position, longitudinal velocity, lateral velocity. 

(a) Scenario 1: LEFT (epoch 148, t = 226) 

pres. x y vx vy

ego 1.000 1.000 0.750 0.373 0npc 0 1.000 0.057 -0.500 -0.089 0npc 1 1.000 0.086 -0.250 -0.091 0npc 2 1.000 0.133 0 -0.074 0npc 3 1.000 0.636 -0.500 -0.088 0

(b) Scenario 2: LEFT (epoch 221, t = 118) 

pres. x y vx vy

ego 1.000 1.000 0.750 0.375 0npc 0 1.000 -0.024 -0.750 -0.107 0npc 1 1.000 0.047 -0.500 -0.113 0npc 2 1.000 0.072 -0.250 -0.102 0npc 3 1.000 0.336 -0.750 -0.106 0

(c) Scenario 3: RIGHT (epoch 92, t = 102) 

pres. x y vx vy

ego 1.000 1.000 0 0.311 0npc 0 1.000 -0.003 0.750 -0.036 0npc 1 1.000 0.063 0.500 -0.061 0npc 2 1.000 0.189 0 -0.057 0npc 3 1.000 0.326 0.250 -0.048 0

(d) Scenario 4: RIGHT (epoch 111, t = 142) 

pres. x y vx vy

ego 1.000 1.000 0.003 0.323 -0.002 npc 0 1.000 0.053 0.497 -0.063 0.002 npc 1 1.000 0.121 -0.003 -0.066 0.002 npc 2 1.000 0.182 0.247 -0.055 0.002 npc 3 1.000 0.335 0.747 -0.073 0.002 

(e) Scenario 5: FASTER (epoch 81, t = 233) 

pres. x y vx vy

ego 1.000 1.000 0.750 0.259 0npc 0 1.000 0.010 -0.500 0.001 0npc 1 1.000 -0.026 -0.250 0.013 0npc 2 1.000 0.066 0 0.005 0npc 3 1.000 0.131 -0.750 -0.003 0

(f) Scenario 6: FASTER (epoch 117, t = 130) 

pres. x y vx vy

ego 1.000 1.000 0.750 0.321 0npc 0 1.000 -0.021 -0.750 -0.066 0npc 1 1.000 -0.023 -0.250 -0.067 0npc 2 1.000 0.088 0 -0.066 0npc 3 1.000 0.191 -0.500 -0.053 0

18